add blog post on handling data duplication in data-heavy environments (#29634)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2021-09-07-data-duplication-in-data-heavy-k8s-env.md

---
layout: blog
title: "How to Handle Data Duplication in Data-Heavy Kubernetes Environments"
date: 2021-09-07
slug: how-to-handle-data-duplication-in-data-heavy-kubernetes-environments 
---

**Authors:**
Augustinas Stirbis (CAST AI)

# How to Handle Data Duplication in Data-Heavy Kubernetes Environments

It’s convenient to create a copy of your application with a copy of its state for each team. 
For example, you might want a separate database copy to test some significant schema changes 
or develop other disruptive operations like bulk insert/delete/update...

**Duplicating data takes a lot of time.** That’s because you need first to download 

> all the data from a source like object storage (S3 or Cloud Storage) and then send 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all the data from a source like object storage (such as Amazon S3 or Google Cloud Storage),
and then send 
```

it back to a storage back-end like EBS or Standard Persistent Disk. There’s a lot of network traffic and CPU/RAM used in this process.
Hardware acceleration by offloading certain expensive operations to dedicated hardware is 
**always a huge performance boost**. It reduces the time required to complete an operation by orders 
of magnitude.

## Volume Snapshots to the rescue

> Kubernetes introduced VolumeSnapshots alpha in 1.12, beta in 1.17, and the Generally Available 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes introduced [VolumeSnapshots](/docs/concepts/storage/volume-snapshots/) as alpha in 1.12, beta in 1.17, and the Generally Available
```

version in 1.20. VolumeSnapshots use specialized APIs from cloud platforms to duplicate volume of data.

Since data is already in the same storage device (array of devices), duplicating data is usually 
a metadata operation. All you need to do is point a new disk to an immutable snapshot and only 
save deltas (or let it do a full-disk copy). As an operation that is inside the storage back-end,
it’s much quicker and usually doesn’t involve sending traffic over the network.

## Sounds like we have our solution, right?

Actually, VolumeSnapshots are Namespaced, and Kubernetes protects Namespaced data from 
being shared between tenants (Namespaces). This Kubernetes limitation is a conscious design 

> decision so that a Pod in a different Namespace can’t mount another application’s PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
decision so that a Pod running in a different Namespace can’t mount another application’s
[PersistentVolumeClaim](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#persistentvolumeclaims) (PVC).
```

One way around it would be to create multiple volumes with duplicate data in one Namespace.
However, you could easily reference the wrong copy.

So the idea is to separate teams/initiatives by Namespaces to avoid that and generally 

> limit access to the production Namespace.

Reviewer: I'd write Namespace lowercased. Especially because: the word “Namespaced” doesn't mean anything to the Kubernetes API.

## Solution? Creating a Golden Snapshot externally

> Another way around this design limitation is to create Snapshot externally (not through Kubernetes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another way around this design limitation is to create a snapshot externally (not through Kubernetes), and then register it as a VolumeSnapshot.
```
?

This is also called pre-provisioning a snapshot manually. Next, I will import it 
as a multi-tenant golden snapshot that can be used for many Namespaces.

> <h4> High-level plan for preparing the Golden Snapshot:</h4>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### High-level plan for preparing the Golden Snapshot
```

1. Identify Disk (EBS/Persistent Disk) that you want to clone with data in the cloud provider
2. Make a Disk Snapshot (in cloud provider console)
3. Get Disk Snapshot ID

> <h4>High-level plan for cloning data for each team </h4>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### High-level plan for cloning data for each team
```

1. Create Namespace “sandbox01”
2. Import Disk Snapshot (ID) as VolumeSnapshotContent to Kubernetes
3. Create VolumeSnapshot in the Namespace "sandbox01" mapped to VolumeSnapshotContent
4. Create the PersistentVolumeClaim from VolumeSnapshot
5. Install Deployment or StatefulSet with PVC

## Step 1: Identify Disk

First, you need to identify your golden source. In my case, it’s a PostgreSQL database
on PersistentVolumeClaim “postgres-pv-claim” in the “production” Namespace.

```terminal
kubectl -n <namespace> get pvc <pvc-name> -o jsonpath='{.spec.volumeName}'
```

> The output will look like this: ```pvc-3096b3ba-38b6-4fd1-a42f-ec99176ed0d90```

Reviewer: How about:
> The output will look similar to:
> ```
> pvc-3096b3ba-38b6-4fd1-a42f-ec99176ed0d90
> ```

## Step 2: Prepare your golden source

You need to do this once or every time you want to refresh your golden data.

### Make a Disk Snapshot

Go to AWS EC2 or GCP Compute Engine console and search for EBS/Persistent Disk 
with the label ```pvc-3096b3ba-38b6-4fd1-a42f-ec99176ed0d9```.

Click on Create snapshot and give it a name. You can do it in Console manually,

> in the CloudShell, or in the terminal if you have gcloud or aws cli installed and configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in AWS CloudShell / Google Cloud Shell, or in the terminal. To create a snapshot in the
terminal you must have the AWS CLI tool (`aws`) or Google's CLI (`gcloud`)
installed and configured.
```

Here’s the command to create snapshot on GCP:

```terminal
gcloud compute disks snapshot <cloud-disk-id> --project=<gcp-project-id> --snapshot-names=<set-new-snapshot-name> --zone=<availability-zone> --storage-location=<region>
```

> <img src="/images/blog/2021-09-07-data-duplication-in-data-heavy-k8s-env/create-volume-snapshot-gcp.png" width="100%" alt="Create volume snapshot GCP" />

Reviewer: I would try a [figure](https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/#figure) here

GCP identifies the disk by its PVC name, so it’s direct mapping. In AWS, you need to 
find volume by the CSIVolumeName AWS tag with PVC name value first that will be used for snapshot creation.

<img src="/images/blog/2021-09-07-data-duplication-in-data-heavy-k8s-env/identify-volume-aws.png" width="100%" alt="Identify volume AWS" />

Mark done Volume (volume-id) ```vol-00c7ecd873c6fb3ec``` and ether create EBS snapshot in AWS Console, or use ```aws cli```.

```terminal
aws ec2 create-snapshot --volume-id '<volume-id>' --description '<set-new-snapshot-name>' --tag-specifications 'ResourceType=snapshot'
```

## Step 3: Get your Disk Snapshot ID

> In AWS, the aws cli command above will output:  ```"SnapshotId": "snap-09ed24a70bc19bbe4"```

Reviewer: I'd write:
> In AWS, the command above will output something similar to:
> ```yaml
> "SnapshotId": "snap-09ed24a70bc19bbe4"
> ```

> If you’re using the GCP cloud, you can get it from the gcloud command by the Snapshot’s given name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you’re using the GCP cloud, you can get the snapshot ID from the gcloud command by querying for the snapshot’s given name:
```

```terminal
gcloud compute snapshots --project=<gcp-project-id> describe <new-snapshot-name> | grep id:
```
Output will look like ```id: 6645363163809389170```

## Step 4: Create a development environment for each team

Now I have my Golden Snapshot, which is immutable data. Each team will get a copy 
of this data, and team members can modify it as they see fit, given that a new EBS/persistent 
disk will be created for each team.

> Below I will add K8s YAML for each Namespace, replacing the Namespace “sandbox01 -> sandbox42”
> names with yq, sed, or templating tools like Kustomize or using variables in the CI/CD pipeline:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below I will define a manifest for each namespace. To save time, you can replace
the namespace name (such as changing “sandbox01” → “sandbox42”) using tools
such as `sed` or `yq`, with Kubernetes-aware templating tools like
[Kustomize](/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/kustomization/),
or using variable substitution in a CI/CD pipeline.

Here's an example manifest:
```

```yaml

> apiVersion: snapshot.storage.k8s.io/v1

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
---
apiVersion: snapshot.storage.k8s.io/v1
```

kind: VolumeSnapshotContent
metadata:
 name: postgresql-orders-db-sandbox01
 namespace: sandbox01
spec:
 deletionPolicy: Retain
 driver: pd.csi.storage.gke.io
 source:
   snapshotHandle: 'gcp/projects/staging-eu-castai-vt5hy2/global/snapshots/6645363163809389170'
 volumeSnapshotRef:
   kind: VolumeSnapshot
   name: postgresql-orders-db-snap
   namespace: sandbox01
---
apiVersion: snapshot.storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: VolumeSnapshot
metadata:
 name: postgresql-orders-db-snap
 namespace: sandbox01
spec:
 source:
   volumeSnapshotContentName: postgresql-orders-db-sandbox01

>    ```

Reviewer: nit: The ``` should be at the start of the line.

> VolumeSnapshotContent (VSC) is not a Namespaced K8s object. But I will create an 
> instance of this object for every Namespace, so the name needs to be unique (hence the Namespace in VSC name).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes, VolumeSnapshotContent (VSC) objects are not namespaced.
However, I need a separate VSC for each different namespace to use, so the
`metadata.name` of each VSC must also be different. To make that straightfoward,
I used the target namespace as part of the name.
```
?

Now it’s time to replace the driver field with the CSI (Container Storage Interface) driver
installed in your K8s cluster. Major cloud providers have CSI driver for block storage that
support VolumeSnapshots but quite often CSI drivers are not installed by default, consult
with your Kubernetes provider. 

> Above VSC example YAML is for GCP cloud, for AWS driver and SnashotHandle values would look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That manifest above defines a VSC that works on GCP.
On AWS, driver and SnashotHandle values might look like:
```

```YAML

> driver: ebs.csi.aws.com
> snapshotHandle: 'snap-07ff83d328c981c98' 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  driver: ebs.csi.aws.com
  source:
    snapshotHandle: "snap-07ff83d328c981c98"
```

```

At this point, I need to use the *Retain* policy, so that the CSI driver doesn’t try to
delete my manually created EBS disk snapshot.

For GCP, you will have to build this string by hand - add a full project ID and snapshot ID.
For AWS, it’s just a plain snapshot ID.

VSC also requires specifying which VolumeSnapshot (VS) will use it, so VSC and VS are
referencing each other.

Now I can create PersistentVolumeClaim from VS above. It’s important to set this first:

```yaml

> apiVersion: v1

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
---
apiVersion: v1
```

title: "How to Handle Data Duplication in Data-Heavy Kubernetes Environments"
date: 2021-09-07
slug: how-to-handle-data-duplication-in-data-heavy-kubernetes-environments 
---

**Authors:**
Augustinas Stirbis (CAST AI)

# How to Handle Data Duplication in Data-Heavy Kubernetes Environments

It’s convenient to create a copy of your application with a copy of its state for each team. 
For example, you might want a separate database copy to test some significant schema changes 
or develop other disruptive operations like bulk insert/delete/update...

**Duplicating data takes a lot of time.** That’s because you need first to download 
all the data from a source like object storage (S3 or Cloud Storage) and then send 
it back to a storage back-end like EBS or Standard Persistent Disk. There’s a lot of network traffic and CPU/RAM used in this process.

Hardware acceleration by offloading certain expensive operations is **always a huge 
performance boost**. It reduces the time required to complete an operation by orders 
of magnitude - for example, GPU computation while you’re watching a high-resolution 
video on Youtube, mining crypto, or training an ML model, CPU instructions for AES 

> disk encryption or TLS, TCP offload (TOE), and many many more.

Reviewer 2: I think this paragraph is unnecessary. The previous two sufficiently lay out the problem. I appreciate the problem/solution framing.

Author: I cut it in half and amended to previous paragrph

## Volume Snapshots to the rescue

Kubernetes introduced Volume Snapshots alpha in 1.12, beta in 1.17, and the Generally Available 
version in 1.20. Volume Snapshots basically allows Kubernetes to use the cloud-native storage 

> snapshotting mechanism that allows data copy to offload from compute to the actual storage device.

Reviewer 2: Can we rephrase this for clarity/brevity?

Perhaps:

> Volume Snapshots use specialized APIs from cloud platforms to duplicate a block of data.

The next paragraph goes into sufficient detail.

Author: Make sense, thanks

Since data is already in the same storage device (array of devices), duplicating data is usually 
a metadata operation. All you need to do is point a new disk to an immutable snapshot and only 
save deltas (or let it do a full-disk copy). As an operation that is inside the storage back-end,
it’s much quicker and usually doesn’t involve sending traffic over the network.

## Sounds like we have our solution, right?

Actually, Volume Snapshots are namespaced, and Kubernetes protects namespaced data from 
being shared between tenants (namespaces). This Kubernetes limitation is a conscious design decision so that a pod in a different namespace can’t mount another application’s Persistent Volume (Claim).

> One way around it would be to create duplicate data accessible on the same namespace. 

Reviewer 2: Can you clarify what you mean by "create duplicate data accessible..."?

> You could create multiple volumes with duplicate data in one namespace. However, you could easily reference the wrong copy.

Author: Thank you for the suggestion, it's more clear now!

But if it says that it’s the “production” namespace and many teams are working on this data,
someone with a fat finger might accidentally swap config files and end up messing up 
production or data used by other teams.

So the idea is to separate teams/initiatives by namespaces to avoid that and generally 

> limit access to the production namespace.

Reviewer 2: 👍

## Solution? Creating a Golden Snapshot externally

Another way around this design limitation is to create Snapshot externally (not through Kubernetes).
This is also called pre-provisioning a snapshot manually. Next, I will import it 
as a multi-tenant golden snapshot that can be used for many namespaces.

> High-level plan for preparing the Golden Snapshot:

Reviewer 2: good idea to have an outline here

Author: h4 set

1. Identify Disk (EBS/Persistent Disk) that you want to clone with data in the cloud provider

> 2. Make a Disk Snapshot (in CSP console)

Reviewer 2: either formally introduce this acronym and fully adopt it throughout

> cloud service provider (CSP)

or replace with 

> cloud provider console

3. Get Disk Snapshot ID

High-level plan for cloning data for each team
1. Create namespace “sandbox01”
2. Import Disk Snapshot (ID) as Volume Snapshot Content to Kubernetes
3. Create Volume Snapshot in the namespace sandbox01 mapped to Volume Snapshot Content
4. Create the Persistent Volume Claim from Volume Snapshot
5. Install deployment/statefulSet with PVC

## Step 1: Identify Disk

First, you need to identify your golden source. In my case, it’s a PostgreSQL database
on PersistentVolumeClaim “postgres-pv-claim” in the “production” namespace.

```terminal
kubectl -n production get pvc postgres-pv-claim -o jsonpath='{.spec.volumeName}'
```

The output will look like this: ```pvc-3096b3ba-38b6-4fd1-a42f-ec99176ed0d90```

## Step 2: Prepare your golden source

You need to do this once or every time you want to refresh your golden data.

### Make a Disk Snapshot

Go to AWS EC2 or GCP Compute Engine console and search for EBS/Persistent Disk 

> with the label ```pvc-3096b3ba-38b6-4fd1-a42f-ec99176ed0d9```.

Reviewer 2: I think we should pick one cloud provider and consistently use it as an example. For example, instead of repeatedly saying "AWS or GCP", let's just stick with GCP. Perhaps add a note at the introduction that GCP is merely used as an illustrative example, and it's possible with other cloud providers.

Author: I think the core message of this blog post, that these features are not well documented and it's not clear how to create VolumeSnapshotContent and reference it in YAML as there is no consistency between CSI implementations.
For example:
   snapshotHandle: 'gcp/projects/staging-eu-castai-vt5hy2/global/snapshots/6645363163809389170'
   snapshotHandle: 'snap-07ff83d328c981c98'

So I'm leaning towards showing this inconsistency, but if it's a deal-breaker we could leave single cloud

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to AWS EC2 or GCP Compute Engine console and search for an EBS volume
(on AWS) or Persistent Disk (on GCP), that has a label matching the last output.
In this case I saw: `pvc-3096b3ba-38b6-4fd1-a42f-ec99176ed0d9`.
```

Click on Create snapshot and give it a name. You can do it in Console manually,
in the Cloud Shell, or in the terminal if you have gcloud or aws cli installed and configured.

> Here’s the command to create snapshot on GCP:

Reviewer 2: let's pick one path to describe in this blog post. I vote for CLI.

```yaml
apiVersion: snapshot.storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: VolumeSnapshotContent
metadata:
 name: postgresql-orders-db-sandbox01
 namespace: sandbox01
spec:
 deletionPolicy: Retain
 driver: storage.csi.cast.ai
 source:
   snapshotHandle: 'gcp/projects/staging-eu-castai-vt5hy2/global/snapshots/6645363163809389170'
   #snapshotHandle: 'snap-07ff83d328c981c98' #for AWS
 volumeSnapshotRef:
   kind: VolumeSnapshot
   name: postgresql-orders-db-snap
   namespace: sandbox01
---
apiVersion: snapshot.storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: VolumeSnapshot
metadata:
 name: postgresql-orders-db-snap
 namespace: sandbox01
spec:
 source:
   volumeSnapshotContentName: postgresql-orders-db-sandbox01
   ```

VolumeSnapshotContent (VSC) is not a namespaced K8s object. But I will create an 
instance of this object for every namespace, so the name needs to be unique (hence the namespace in VSC name).

Now it’s time to replace the driver field with the CSI driver installed in the K8s cluster.
The CAST AI CSI driver supports all of the major cloud services so this YAML will work on AWS,
GCP, and probably Azure (though Azure has been lagging on their cloud storage drivers for K8s)

> on the CAST AI K8s cluster.

Reviewer 2: We avoid introducing new commercial dependencies without a very compelling reason. This would require review from someone more senior in sig docs. 

I do not think this use case is compelling. If the snapshot is on AWS, I'm going to use the AWS driver.

Author: Fair point

At this point, I need to use the Retain policy, so that the CSI driver doesn’t try to
delete my manually created EBS disk snapshot.

For GCP, you will have to build this string by hand - add a full project ID and snapshot ID.
For AWS, it’s just a plain snapshot ID.

> VSC also requires specifying which VolumeSnapshot (VS) will use it, so VSC and VS are

Reviewer 2: ty for properly introducing acronyms

referencing each other.

Now I can create PersistentVolumeClaim from VS above. It’s important to set this first:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
 name: postgres-pv-claim
 namespace: sandbox01
spec:
 dataSource:
   kind: VolumeSnapshot
   name: postgresql-orders-db-snap
   apiGroup: snapshot.storage.k8s.io
 accessModes:
   - ReadWriteOnce
 resources:
   requests:
     storage: 21Gi
```

Usually, Default StorageClass will have WaitForFirstConsumer. This means that the

> actual Cloud Disk will be created from the Golden Snapshot only when some pod bounds that PVC.

Reviewer 2: thanks for calling this out. can you link to more info on `WaitForFirstConsumer`?

Author: added link

Now I assign that PVC to my pod (in my case, it’s Postgresql) as I would with any other PVC.

```terminal
kubectl -n sandbox01 get volumesnapshotContent,volumesnapshot,pvc,pod
```

Both VS and VSC should be READYTOUSE true, PVC bound, and the pod (Deployment/StatefulSet) running.

**To keep on using data from my Golden Snapshot, I just need to repeat this for the
next namespace and voilà! No need to waste time and compute resources on the duplication process.**

I hope this shows you that it’s worth being open to optimization and finding new 
ways of optimizing Kubernetes, especially since things change fast in its landscape.

> **Feel free to drop me a message on LinkedIn if you have any questions about this.**

Reviewer 2: I'd leave this out, or add a link to your name at the top.

---
layout: blog
title: "How to Handle Data Duplication in Data-Heavy Kubernetes Environments"
date: 2021-09-07
slug: how-to-handle-data-duplication-in-data-heavy-kubernetes-environments 
---

**Authors:**
Augustinas Stirbis (CAST AI)

## Why Duplicate Data?

It’s convenient to create a copy of your application with a copy of its state for each team. 
For example, you might want a separate database copy to test some significant schema changes 
or develop other disruptive operations like bulk insert/delete/update...

**Duplicating data takes a lot of time.** That’s because you need first to download 

> all the data from a source like object storage (such as Amazon S3 or Google Cloud Storage),

Author: generalized intro without specific clouds

> all the data from a source like object storage (such as Amazon S3 or Google Cloud Storage),

Author: is this what you meant?

and then send 
it back to a storage back-end like EBS or Standard Persistent Disk. There’s a lot of network traffic and CPU/RAM used in this process.
Hardware acceleration by offloading certain expensive operations to dedicated hardware is 
**always a huge performance boost**. It reduces the time required to complete an operation by orders 
of magnitude.

## Volume Snapshots to the rescue

Kubernetes introduced [VolumeSnapshots](/docs/concepts/storage/volume-snapshots/) as alpha in 1.12, beta in 1.17, and the Generally Available

> version in 1.20. VolumeSnapshots use specialized APIs from cloud platforms to duplicate volume of data.

Author: completely agree

Since data is already in the same storage device (array of devices), duplicating data is usually 
a metadata operation. All you need to do is point a new disk to an immutable snapshot and only 
save deltas (or let it do a full-disk copy). As an operation that is inside the storage back-end,

> it’s much quicker and usually doesn’t involve sending traffic over the network.

Author: agree, explanation on local vs remote snapshots would be helpful

> it’s much quicker and usually doesn’t involve sending traffic over the network.

Author: is this what you meant?

> it’s much quicker and usually doesn’t involve sending traffic over the network.

Reviewer 3: Yes, looks good now.

installed in your K8s cluster. Major cloud providers have CSI driver for block storage that
support VolumeSnapshots but quite often CSI drivers are not installed by default, consult
with your Kubernetes provider. 

That manifest above defines a VSC that works on GCP.
On AWS, driver and SnashotHandle values might look like:

```YAML
  driver: ebs.csi.aws.com
  source:
    snapshotHandle: "snap-07ff83d328c981c98"
```

At this point, I need to use the *Retain* policy, so that the CSI driver doesn’t try to
delete my manually created EBS disk snapshot.

For GCP, you will have to build this string by hand - add a full project ID and snapshot ID.
For AWS, it’s just a plain snapshot ID.

VSC also requires specifying which VolumeSnapshot (VS) will use it, so VSC and VS are
referencing each other.

Now I can create PersistentVolumeClaim from VS above. It’s important to set this first:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
 name: postgres-pv-claim
 namespace: sandbox01
spec:
 dataSource:
   kind: VolumeSnapshot
   name: postgresql-orders-db-snap
   apiGroup: snapshot.storage.k8s.io
 accessModes:
   - ReadWriteOnce
 resources:
   requests:
     storage: 21Gi
```

> Usually, default StorageClass will have [WaitForFirstConsumer](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/#volume-binding-mode) policy. This means that the

Reviewer 3: > Usually, default StorageClass will have [WaitForFirstConsumer]

Is this true?  It's better not to make this statement.  How about "If default StorageClass has WaitForFirstConsumer policy" instead?

Author: no problem

on PersistentVolumeClaim “postgres-pv-claim” in the “production” namespace.

```terminal
kubectl -n <namespace> get pvc <pvc-name> -o jsonpath='{.spec.volumeName}'
```

The output will look similar to:
```
pvc-3096b3ba-38b6-4fd1-a42f-ec99176ed0d90
```

## Step 2: Prepare your golden source

You need to do this once or every time you want to refresh your golden data.

### Make a Disk Snapshot

Go to AWS EC2 or GCP Compute Engine console and search for an EBS volume
(on AWS) or Persistent Disk (on GCP), that has a label matching the last output.
In this case I saw: `pvc-3096b3ba-38b6-4fd1-a42f-ec99176ed0d9`.

Click on Create snapshot and give it a name. You can do it in Console manually,
in AWS CloudShell / Google Cloud Shell, or in the terminal. To create a snapshot in the
terminal you must have the AWS CLI tool (`aws`) or Google's CLI (`gcloud`)
installed and configured.

Here’s the command to create snapshot on GCP:

```terminal
gcloud compute disks snapshot <cloud-disk-id> --project=<gcp-project-id> --snapshot-names=<set-new-snapshot-name> --zone=<availability-zone> --storage-location=<region>
```

> <figure attr="GCP snapshot creation">
>   <img src="/images/blog/2021-09-07-data-duplication-in-data-heavy-k8s-env/create-volume-snapshot-gcp.png" width="100%" alt="Create volume snapshot GCP" />
> </figure>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="/images/blog/2021-09-07-data-duplication-in-data-heavy-k8s-env/create-volume-snapshot-gcp.png" alt="Screenshot of a terminal showing volume snapshot creation on GCP" title="GCP snapshot creation" >}}
```

GCP identifies the disk by its PVC name, so it’s direct mapping. In AWS, you need to 
find volume by the CSIVolumeName AWS tag with PVC name value first that will be used for snapshot creation.

> <figure  attr="Identify disk ID on AWS">
>   <img src="/images/blog/2021-09-07-data-duplication-in-data-heavy-k8s-env/identify-volume-aws.png" width="100%" alt="Identify volume AWS" />
> </figure>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="/images/blog/2021-09-07-data-duplication-in-data-heavy-k8s-env/identify-volume-aws.png" alt="Screenshot of AWS web console, showing EBS volume identification" title="Identify disk ID on AWS" >}}
```

**always a huge performance boost**. It reduces the time required to complete an operation by orders 
of magnitude.

## Volume Snapshots to the rescue

Kubernetes introduced [VolumeSnapshots](/docs/concepts/storage/volume-snapshots/) as alpha in 1.12,
beta in 1.17, and the Generally Available version in 1.20. 
VolumeSnapshots use specialized APIs from storage providers to duplicate volume of data.

Since data is already in the same storage device (array of devices), duplicating data is usually 
a metadata operation for storage providers with local snapshots (majority of on-premise storage providers).
All you need to do is point a new disk to an immutable snapshot and only 
save deltas (or let it do a full-disk copy). As an operation that is inside the storage back-end,
it’s much quicker and usually doesn’t involve sending traffic over the network.
Public Clouds storage providers under the hood work a bit differently. They save snapshots
to Object Storage and then copy back from Object storage to Block storage when "duplicating" disk.
Technically there is a lot of Compute and network resources spent on Cloud providers side,

> but from Kubernetes user perspective VolumeSnapshots work the same way is it local or

Reviewer 3: is it -> whether it is?

Author: Line 31 describes local snapshot storage providers, like 36 about remote snapshot storage providers. Did I not understand your first comment and you meant something else?

remote snapshot storage provider and no Compute and Network resources are involved in this operation.

## Sounds like we have our solution, right?

Actually, VolumeSnapshots are namespaced, and Kubernetes protects namespaced data from 
being shared between tenants (Namespaces). This Kubernetes limitation is a conscious design 
decision so that a Pod running in a different namespace can’t mount another application’s
[PersistentVolumeClaim](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#persistentvolumeclaims) (PVC).

One way around it would be to create multiple volumes with duplicate data in one namespace.
However, you could easily reference the wrong copy.

So the idea is to separate teams/initiatives by namespaces to avoid that and generally 
limit access to the production namespace.

## Solution? Creating a Golden Snapshot externally

Another way around this design limitation is to create Snapshot externally (not through Kubernetes).
This is also called pre-provisioning a snapshot manually. Next, I will import it 

> as a multi-tenant golden snapshot that can be used for many namespaces.

Reviewer 3: Add a line to clarify that you'll use AWS EBS and GCE PD to illustrate how this works.

Author: is this what you meant?
